---
layout: post
nav-class: dark
categories: ruben
title: Ruben's Q3 2023 Update
author-id: ruben
author-name: Rubén Pérez Hidalgo
---

During Q3 2023, I've been making progress in the following areas:

### BoostServerTech

As you may know, [BoostServerTech](https://github.com/anarthal/servertech-chat) is a series of projects that showcase how Boost can be used
to create high-performance web applications. It's a place to showcase Boost technology to both
authors and users, and try new stuff.

I originally created the project in July as a "test lab", to guide Boost.MySQL development.
During this Q3, the project has advanced a lot:

- Created the [project proposal](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1ZQrod1crs8EaNLLqSYIRMacwR3Rv0hC5l-gfL-jOp2M/edit).
- Developed the proposed chat application prototype, including a React front-end and a C++ backend using Boost.Beast and Boost.Redis.
- Made the project robust by developing a unit test suite for both front-end and back-end, and an integration test suite.
- Deployed the project to production using AWS and containers, featuring a CloudFormation template that makes new deployments very easy.
- Wrote extensive documentation about the project, so it can be useful for other developers, as well as other Boost authors who want to write their own ServerTech application.
- Extended the server's functionality by adding authentication and a MySQL database (using Boost.MySQL).

### Boost.Cobalt feedback and review

I've been quite involved in Boost.Cobalt (former Boost.Async) submission and review process:

- Provided Klemens with early feedback about documentation, prior to review.
- I wrote a fork of the BoostServerTech chat application using Boost.Cobalt. This uncovered some issues and yielded some useful experience that the author has already incorporated into the library.
- I wrote my review with all this.

### Boost.MySQL

- Implemented fuzz testing for Boost.MySQL serialization functions.
- Fixed minor issues and released Boost.MySQL 1.83.
- Implemented `connection::reset_session`, which allows cleaning session state and is a requirement for connection pooling.

### Site docs

I've done some contributions to the new Boost documentation:

- I wrote the [fuzz testing guide](https://docs.cppalliance.org/contributor-guide/testing/fuzzing.html).
- I provided some feedback about other pages.
