---
layout: post
nav-class: dark
categories: peter
title: Peter Turcan Q2 2024 Status
author-id: peter
author-name: Peter Turcan
---

- _Post-Release Engagement_ section added to the Contributors FAQ, providing seven questions and answers that new library developers have on their likely workload following the release. Includes examples of feedback from past libraries, and the unwelcome surprises and praise that followed.

- _Other Languages_ (Python, C#, Java) section added to the Users FAQ, providing five questions and answers - including code snippets - on interfacing non-C++ language apps with the Boost libraries. The code snippets include how to handle return values, and errors.

- _Borland Portability_ section updated, for the few developers out there still using Borland C++!

- The Contributor Guide _Table of Contents_ revamped so it's more logically structured.

- The Formal Reviews guide, including the current and past review schedules, extensively edited and modernized.

- A Development section added to the User Guide, with good programming advice on _Implementation Variations_, _Counted Body_, _Generic Programming_, and _Exception Safety_ topics migrated and updated from earlier documents.

- Our _Logo Policy Media Guide_ added to the Documentation section of the Contributor Guide.

- A _Local Regression Tests_ topic added to the Contributor Guide.

- Good advice on attending the ISO Meetings on C++ added to the Users FAQ.

- _Managing Reviews_ and _Writing Reviews_ sections updated and added to the Formal Reviews guide.

- The _Boost Discussion Policy_ revamped and added to the Community section of the User Guide.

- The Boost Software License FAQ updated and moved to the User Guide FAQ.