---
layout: post
nav-class: dark
categories: ruben
title: "Boost.MySQL 1.87 features: with_params and with_diagnostics"
author-id: ruben
author-name: Rubén Pérez Hidalgo
---

## Easy client-side SQL using with_params

In previous posts, we had seen how Boost.MySQL client-side SQL formatting
can be used to implement a wide variety of use cases. It was originally
created for complex cases, like batch inserts, but it can also be applied for
simple ones. Up to Boost 1.86, to retrieve a user by ID with client-side SQL,
you could write this:

```cpp
void lookup(mysql::any_connection& conn, int id)
{
    // Compose the query. May generate "SELECT * FROM user WHERE id  = 10"
    auto query = mysql::format_sql(conn.format_opts().value(), "SELECT * FROM user WHERE id = {}", id);

    // Run it
    mysql::static_results<user> res;
    conn.execute(query, res);

    // Do something with the results
}
```

This is still verbose, and has 3 points where an error can happen:
in `format_opts`, in `format_sql` and in `execute`.
Handling these 3 without exceptions is much more involved.

Boost 1.86 adds a new execution request, `with_params`, than can be used to simplify
most queries:

```cpp
void lookup(mysql::any_connection& conn, int id)
{
    // Compose the query in the client and run the request
    mysql::static_results<user> res;
    conn.execute(mysql::with_params("SELECT * FROM user WHERE id = {}", id), res);

    // Do something with the results
}
```

When executing `with_params`, the given query string is formatted
(as per `format_sql`) and then sent to the client for execution.

This is much less verbose, and gathers all possible errors under the `execute` function,
making using exception-less code much easier. It's also more efficient, as
the query is serialized directly to the network buffer.
All constructs available in `format_sql` are available when using `with_params`.

## Exceptions with diagnostics in async functions

When using throwing sync functions, like `conn.execute("SELECT 1", res)`,
an exception of type `mysql::error_with_diagnostics` is thrown on error.
This is a `system::system_error`, with enhanced error information
provided by the server. Implementing this is easy because the
exception is thrown directly by Boost.MySQL.

The async case is not that straightforward. Boost.Asio throws the exceptions
for us, and has no way to access our diagnostics. Until Boost 1.86,
we recommended the following:

```cpp
asio::awaitable<void> handle_request(mysql::connection& conn)
{
    mysql::results r;
    mysql::diagnostics diag;
    auto [ec] = co_await conn.async_execute("SELECT 1", r, diag, asio::as_tuple(asio::deferred));
    mysql::throw_on_error(ec, diag);
}
```

This is error-prone. The new `with_diagnostics` completion token
can be used with async throwing schemes to simplify this task:

```cpp
asio::awaitable<void> handle_request(mysql::connection& conn)
{
    mysql::results r;
    co_await conn.async_execute("SELECT 1", r, mysql::with_diagnostics(asio::deferred));
}
```

Since this is a very common case, this is actually the default completion
token for `any_connection`, and the above can be written as:

```cpp
asio::awaitable<void> handle_request(mysql::connection& conn)
{
    mysql::results r;
    co_await conn.async_execute("SELECT 1", r);
}
```

Which makes coroutines in throwing schemes actually useful.

I've also developed another custom completion token to aid with tests.
I've learnt a lot and I can tell you: developing a completion token
is not for the faint-hearted, and requires _a lot_ of testing.

## Timeouts: support for asio::cancel_after, asio::cancel_at

These tokens require special support from libraries to work.
Starting with Boost 1.87, Boost.MySQL supports these tokens.
From now on, setting a timeout to a query is as simple as:

```cpp
asio::awaitable<void> handle_request(mysql::connection& conn)
{
    mysql::results r;
    co_await conn.async_execute("SELECT 1", r, asio::cancel_after(std::chrono::seconds(5)));
}
```

## Thread-safety in connection_pool

`connection_pool` tried to provide easy thread-safety by using special executor
semantics. Bug reports indicated that this is a feature that people use, but
that the design wasn't entirely correct. Now that I've learnt more about
Asio, executors and cancellation, I've re-written thread-safety support
for `connection_pool`.

The interface is slightly different, specifying a boolean flag to enable
or disable it. When disabled (the default), pools exhibit the usual Asio
executor semantics, with no overhead. When enabled, a strand is internally
created, and cancellation signals are appropriately wired to ensure
robust thread-safety semantics. The thread sanitizer has helped a lot
in detecting problems.

I've also removed the `connection_pool::async_get_connection` overloads
involving timeouts. This is now better handled by `asio::cancel_after`.

With these changes done, `connection_pool` is ready to commit
for API stability in Boost 1.87.

## pydocca migration

The Boost.JSON author has kindly implemented a new version of the
`docca` toolchain. It's faster, has less dependencies, and
produces much better output.

I've migrated Boost.MySQL to use it. In the process, I've learnt
the tool internals, filed a lot of issues that have been promptly
solved, and in general improved the quality of my reference docs.

I also developed a proof-of-concept Asciidoc generator,
based on pydocca. You can see an example of the resulting docs
https://anarthal.github.io/pydocca-asciidoc/mysql/boost/mysql/any_connection/connect.html:[here].
This has helped me understand the things I don't like
about the current reference doc templates, so I can provide
feedback on the new ones currently under development.

## Modular Boost (b2)

Like other libraries, Boost.MySQL has been adapted to use
the new modular Boost infrastructure. As expected, some things
broke, but we've managed to bring them up again.

## Other contributions

I have performed some other tasks in Boost.MySQL:

- I've heavily refactored testing infrastructure, with increased support
  to detect non-conformities with the Asio universal model.
- I've implemented immediate executor support in `connection` and `any_connection`.
- I've performed the required preparation for the 1.86 Boost release.
- I've fixed a number of other small issues.

I've managed to perform small contributions to other Boost libraries, including
Boost.Process, Boost.Redis and Boost.Pfr.
