---
layout: post
nav-class: dark
categories: peter
title: Peter Turcan Q4 2023 Status
author-id: peter
author-name: Peter Turcan
---

* Wrote a section on the Super-project, based on some legacy Wiki pages that needed considerable updating, and the boostdep tool steps as this covered installing the necessary components. Covered four main topics: the Super-project layout, Getting Started, Library Maintenance and Library Workflow.

* Wrote a Best-Practices section on Beneficial Dependencies - the dependencies used by the most libraries of Boost. These include Boost.Config, Boost.Core, Boost.Assert, Boost.StaticAssert, Boost.ThrowException, and for metaprogramming Boost.MP11.

* Added a section to the Boost History topic covering the BoostCon/C++ Now conference. The location of the conference in Aspen, Colorado comes with some colorful twists:  "Mild-mannered black bears live in the area. Please close doors behind you in the evenings."

* Updated the Documentation and Requirements sections with some good information for organization requirements, library metadata and documentation guidelines.

* Added a Site-docs Style Guide, based on an existing style guide that was outside of the documentation, covering some basic color, wording, URL and image guidelines.

* Improved some navigation linking issues.

* Improved some headline text, bringing the headlines into line with our standards.

* Provided some detailed blog post feedback.

* Working on a number of topics that have yet to be completed, including the B2 and CMake build systems, the developers FAQ, the Boost Test Matrix, Advanced Builds, and others.